AI Tutorial (#8297)
Unleash/unleash: website/docs/feature-flag-tutorials/use-cases/ai.md

---
title: How to use feature flags with AI
slug: /feature-flag-tutorials/use-cases/ai
---

> Many tech companies today are implementing some form of generative AI with LLMs into their products. This is usually a chatbot or a content generator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many tech companies today are integrating generative AI with large language models (LLMs) into their products, often in the form of chatbots or content generators.
```

> The main way to interact with LLMs today is via a set of APIs, usually either OpenAI, Anthropic or aggregators like Groq. All the APIs usually have similar parameters, like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main way to interact with LLMs today is via a set of APIs, usually either OpenAI, Anthropic, or aggregators like Groq. Most of these APIs have similar parameters, such as:
```

-   `model`: The model and the specific version of the model to use.
-   `prompt`: The prompt to give to the LLM.

> Because all these models vary a lot in their capabilities, chances are you'll be testing multiple models, and multiple versions of the same model, and multiple prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the wide range of capabilities across different models, it's recommended to test multiple models, versions, and prompts.
```

> This is where feature flags are super useful. And this is what we'll be doing in this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where feature flags are super useful. They allow you to easily switch between different configurations. In this tutorial, we’ll explore how to use feature flags with AI models.

> We'll be starting with a basic chatbot. I know building a chatbot is a total cliché at this point, but it's a small, self-contained example that everyone knows how to interact with. You can take this example and apply it to any other use case where you need to interact with an LLM via an API.

Reviewer: We should avoid saying "I" if possible. Also feels a bit too informal to me, how about something like:

Although building a chatbot is a common example, it’s a small and self-contained way to demonstrate these concepts.

> We'll be starting with a basic chatbot. I know building a chatbot is a total cliché at this point, but it's a small, self-contained example that everyone knows how to interact with. You can take this example and apply it to any other use case where you need to interact with an LLM via an API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll start with a basic chatbot. I know building a chatbot is a total cliché at this point, but it's a small, self-contained example that everyone knows how to interact with. You can take this example and apply it to any other use case where you need to interact with an LLM via an API.
```

First, clone the repo:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/alvinometric/feature-flags-ai
cd feature-flags-ai
```

> Install the dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the dependencies:
```

```sh
npm install
```

> Run the app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the app:
```

```sh
npm run dev
```

> And you should see something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now see a chatbot UI, like this:
```

![chatbot UI](./sveltekit-chatbot.png)

> This is a simple Sveltekit app with a chatbot UI. It doesn't really matter if you've never used Sveltekit before. It's similar to Next.js or Nuxt or SolidStart, where your file structure defines your routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a simple Sveltekit app with a chatbot interface. If you’re not familiar with SvelteKit, it works similarly to frameworks like Next.js, Nuxt, or SolidStart, where your file structure defines the routing.
```

The most important file for this tutorial is the `src/routes/api/chat/+server.js` file.

> It creates an API endpoint at `/api/chat`. When your frontend sends a POST request to `/api/chat`, this is the code that handles it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It creates an API endpoint at `/api/chat`. When your frontend sends a POST request to `/api/chat`, this is the code that handles the request.
```

```javascript
import { createOpenAI } from "@ai-sdk/openai";
import { streamText } from "ai";
import { env } from "$env/dynamic/private";

const openai = createOpenAI({
    apiKey: env.OPENAI_API_KEY ?? "",
});

const variants = {
    variant1: {
        model: "gpt-3.5-turbo",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
    variant2: {
        model: "gpt-4-turbo",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
    variant3: {
        model: "gpt-4-vision-preview",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
};

export const POST = async ({ request }) => {
    const { messages } = await request.json();
    const variant = variants["variant1"];
    const result = await streamText({
        model: openai(variant.model),
        messages,
        max_tokens: variant.max_tokens,
        temperature: variant.temperature,
    });
    return result.toDataStreamResponse();
};
```

This file is doing a few key things:

> 1. It sets up our OpenAI client with an API key.

Reviewer: Doesn't need to be numbered, I think. Paraphrasing for parallelism with the list below:
```suggestion
1. Sets up our OpenAI client with an API key.
```

> 2. It defines different AI model configurations in the `variants` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Defines different AI model configurations in the `variants` object.
```

> 3. The `POST` function handles incoming chat requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Handles incoming chat requests with the `POST` function.
```

When a request comes in, it:

> -   Extracts the messages from the request body

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Extracts the messages from the request body.
```

> -   Selects a variant (currently hardcoded to 'variant1')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Selects a variant (currently hardcoded to 'variant1').
```

> -   Uses the OpenAI API to generate a response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Uses the OpenAI API to generate a response.
```

> -   Streams the response back to the client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Streams the response back to the client.
```

> The `streamText` function part of some utilities provided by Vercel's AI SDK, which helps deal with real-time streaming of the AI's responses and other AI-related tasks.

Reviewer: This sentence is maybe missing a word?

Reviewer: Maybe: The streamText function, part of Vercel’s AI SDK, assists with the real-time streaming of AI responses and other AI-related tasks.

## Creating a feature flag with AI variants

Instead of hardcoding `variant1`, we want to use feature flags to dynamically choose which AI model to use. This will let us easily switch between models, test different configurations, or even do some A/B testing.

To implement this, we'll need to:

1. Set up a feature flag provider (we'll use Unleash).

> 2. Replace our static `variants` selection with feature flag calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Replace our static variant selection with feature flag calls.
```

3. Use the feature flag in our code to determine which AI model and settings to use for each request.

### Install a local feature flag provider

> In this section, we’ll install Unleash, run the instance locally, log in, and create a feature flag. If you prefer, you can use other tools instead of Unleash, but you’ll need to update the code accordingly. The basic steps will probably be the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we’ll install Unleash, run the instance locally, log in, and create a feature flag. If you prefer, you can use other tools instead of Unleash, but you’ll need to update the code accordingly.
```

Use Git to clone the Unleash repository and Docker to build and run it. Open a terminal window and run the following commands:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/unleash/unleash.git
cd unleash
docker compose up -d
```

> You will now have Unleash installed onto your machine and running in the background. You can access this instance in your web browser at [http://localhost:4242](http://localhost:4242).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You now have Unleash installed on your machine and running in the background. You can access this instance in your web browser at [http://localhost:4242](http://localhost:4242).
```

Log in to the platform using these credentials:

```
Username: admin
Password: unleash4all
```

> Click the ‘New feature flag’ button to create a new feature flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **New feature flag** to create a new feature flag.
```

The main way to interact with LLMs today is via a set of APIs, usually either OpenAI, Anthropic or aggregators like Groq. Most of these APIs have similar parameters, like:

-   `model`: The model and the specific version of the model to use.
-   `prompt`: The prompt to give to the LLM.

Given how much these models vary in their capabilities, chances are you'll be testing multiple models, multiple versions of the same model, and multiple prompts.

This is where feature flags are super useful. They allow you to easily switch between different configurations. In this tutorial, we’ll explore how to use feature flags with AI models.

We'll start with a basic chatbot. I know building a chatbot is a total cliché at this point, but it's a small, self-contained example that everyone knows how to interact with. You can take this example and apply it to any other use case where you need to interact with an LLM via an API.

First, clone the repo:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/alvinometric/feature-flags-ai
cd feature-flags-ai
```

Install the dependencies:

```sh
npm install
```

Run the app:

```sh
npm run dev
```

> You should now see a chatbot UI, like this:

Reviewer 2: We might want to mention that an OpenAI API key should be set up before validating the assumption that the output will match the screenshot.

![chatbot UI](./sveltekit-chatbot.png)

> This is a simple Sveltekit app with a chatbot interface. If you’re not familiar with SvelteKit, it works similarly to frameworks like Next.js, Nuxt, or SolidStart, where your file structure defines the routing.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we could add a link to SvelteKit or their documentation?

```suggestion
This is a simple SvelteKit app with a chatbot interface. If you’re not familiar with SvelteKit, it works similarly to frameworks like Next.js, Nuxt, or SolidStart, where your file structure defines the routing.
```

});

const variants = {
    variant1: {
        model: "gpt-3.5-turbo",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
    variant2: {
        model: "gpt-4-turbo",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
    variant3: {
        model: "gpt-4-vision-preview",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
};

export const POST = async ({ request }) => {
    const { messages } = await request.json();
    const variant = variants["variant1"];
    const result = await streamText({
        model: openai(variant.model),
        messages,
        max_tokens: variant.max_tokens,
        temperature: variant.temperature,
    });
    return result.toDataStreamResponse();
};
```

This file is doing a few key things:

1. Sets up our OpenAI client with an API key.
2. Defines different AI model configurations in the `variants` object.
3. Handles incoming chat requests with the `POST` function.

When a request comes in, it:

-   Extracts the messages from the request body.
-   Selects a variant (currently hardcoded to 'variant1').
-   Uses the OpenAI API to generate a response.
-   Streams the response back to the client.

> The `streamText` function is one of the utilities provided by Vercel's AI SDK. It helps deal with the real-time streaming of the AI's responses.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should include a link to Vercel’s AI SDK documentation.

## Creating a feature flag with AI variants

Instead of hardcoding `variant1`, we want to use feature flags to dynamically choose which AI model to use. This will let us easily switch between models, test different configurations, or even do some A/B testing to see which model performs better for which task.

To implement this, we'll need to:

1. Set up a feature flag provider (we'll use Unleash).

> 2. Replace our static variant selection with feature flag calls.

Reviewer 2: "Calls" might sound a bit too loaded. It’s just a single "call" that returns a variant.

3. Use the feature flag in our code to determine which AI model and settings to use for each request.

### Install a local feature flag provider

In this section, we’ll install Unleash, run the instance locally, log in, and create a feature flag. If you prefer, you can use other tools instead of Unleash, but you’ll need to update the code accordingly.

Use Git to clone the Unleash repository and Docker to build and run it. Open a terminal window and run the following commands:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/unleash/unleash.git
cd unleash
docker compose up -d
```

You now have Unleash installed on your machine and running in the background. You can access this instance in your web browser at [http://localhost:4242](http://localhost:4242).

Log in to the platform using these credentials:

```
Username: admin
Password: unleash4all
```

> Click **New feature flag** to create a new feature flag.

Reviewer: Do we need the screenshot below? Could it just be?

```suggestion
Click **New feature flag** to create a new feature flag, called `gpt-version`.
```

> ![Create a new feature flag](../ruby/new-ff.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Just if you take [this suggestion](https://github.com/Unleash/unleash/pull/8297#discussion_r1804240936)

> Create a new feature flag called `gpt-version`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Just if you take [this suggestion](https://github.com/Unleash/unleash/pull/8297#discussion_r1804240936)

> Create a new feature flag called `gpt-version`.

Reviewer 2: It might be too much effort to change now, but I would have named the feature flag something like `ai-model` or something more generic, like `ai` or `ai-experiment`. The enabled status would control whether the assistant is active, and the variant would determine which model to use. This also adds an interesting vector to the guide: whether our experiment is enabled at all. For example, we might want to disable it if it stops working, we run out of credits, etc.

> After that, and this the most important part, we need to add a variant to our feature flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, and this is the most important part, we need to add a variant to our feature flag.
```

What we'll do is hold all the model configurations in the feature flag variants.

So, we can take these model configurations:

```javascript
const variants = {
    variant1: {
        model: "gpt-3.5-turbo",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
    variant2: {
        model: "gpt-4-turbo",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
    variant3: {
        model: "gpt-4-vision-preview",
        max_tokens: 4096,
        temperature: 1,
    },
};
```

> And add them into Unleash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And add them in Unleash.
```

Reviewer: The instructions here seem brief. I would probably touch upon enabling an environment and adding variants to the strategy. Also maybe cover the variant weighting, and/or show it on the screenshot?

> ![a variant with parameters for an OpenAI model](./model-variant.png)

Reviewer: Normally we take Admin UI screenshots in light mode. I think it's ok for it to be dark mode, if it's the only Admin UI screenshot on the page, or if all of them are consistent. Having some light and some dark might easily give the impression that it's not the same interface. Regardless of the share, could you please use one of these? Adjusted the spacing a bit and tried to not cut off UI elements as much as possible

<img width="1106" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-17 at 09 36 12" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/776ed67d-7406-48eb-8fb3-eadd329091b2">
<img width="1106" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-17 at 09 34 55" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d46b17a6-c726-46bb-958a-3f2328c6aef5">

## Querying AI feature flags

Now let's go back to the code and grab our AI config from the feature flag that we just created.

First, install the Unleash Node.js client:

```sh
npm install unleash-client
```

Now, let's modify our `+server.js` file to use Unleash:

```javascript
import { initialize } from "unleash-client";
import { createOpenAI } from "@ai-sdk/openai";
import { streamText } from "ai";
import { env } from "$env/dynamic/private";

const openai = createOpenAI({
    apiKey: env.OPENAI_API_KEY ?? "",
});

const unleash = initialize({
    url: "http://localhost:4242/api/",
    appName: "my-ai-app",
    customHeaders: { Authorization: env.UNLEASH_API_KEY ?? "" },
});

export const POST = async ({ request }) => {
    const { messages } = await request.json();

    // Get the feature flag variant

>     const variant = unleash.getVariant("gpt-versions");

Reviewer 2: It should be `gpt-version`, not `gpt-versions`, right? I suggest going through the guide yourself to double-check everything works correctly and to ensure we didn’t miss small details like this.

```suggestion
    const variant = unleash.getVariant("gpt-version");
```

    const result = await streamText({
        model: openai(variant.model),
        messages,
        max_tokens: variant.max_tokens,
        temperature: variant.temperature,
    });

    return result.toDataStreamResponse();
};
```

This setup uses the Unleash client to fetch the value of a feature flag called `gpt-versions`.

Now, instead of hardcoding 'variant1', we're dynamically choosing the AI model based on the feature flag variant.

> This setup gives us a ton of flexibility. Want to roll out GPT-4 to 10% of your users? Easy. Need to quickly switch everyone back to GPT-3.5 because of a bug? No problem. You can do all of this from your Unleash dashboard without touching your code.

Reviewer 2: Not only without touching your code, but also without needing to redeploy, which is something we might want to emphasize as well.

## Conclusion

> Thanks for following along! You've learned one way to use feature flags to interact with AI models.

Reviewer 2: The conclusion feels a bit lacking. We might want to do a quick recap of what we’ve covered in this guide and how it can help readers going forward.

Here's a suggestion:

Thanks for sticking with us! In this guide, we covered how to use feature flags to manage AI models more flexibly. By integrating feature flags, you can quickly switch between different model configurations, experiment with variations, and even roll out updates without needing to touch your code or redeploy. This gives you more control over how and when your AI features are used, whether you’re rolling out a new model or responding to something unexpected, like running out of credits or discovering a bug.

Hopefully, this gives you some useful tools to better manage your AI experiments, allowing you to adapt quickly and keep things running smoothly.

slug: /feature-flag-tutorials/use-cases/ai
---

> Hello,

Reviewer: I think I preferred it without the Hello.

I think this intro bit can live without a heading (as it is now), but I would probably add the first heading before we start doing any actual work. Like above the section that starts with 'We'll start with a basic chatbot... something like "Initial setup"? maybe?
